Software development process

The software development process is also known as the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC).

Why Is The Software Development Process Important?

It enables clear communication
It optimizes the workflow
It saves you money

7 Key Steps Of The Software Development Process

Step #1: Planning And Research: 

Scope of the project
Timeline
Resources it will require
Estimated costs

Step #2: Feasibility Analysis
software requirements 
The goal of the feasibility analysis is to determine whether you have the necessary resources and tools to successfully complete the project.

It will also help you identify potential risks and issues you may run into during the next stages.

Step #3: Design And Prototyping
The design and prototyping stage of software development is similar to drafting an outline of a blog article or creating a storyboard for a video.Step #4: Development


Step #4: Development
The most time-consuming one

Step #5: Quality Assurance

During this stage, the quality assurance (QA) team will perform a range of tests that simulate the real-life use of the software.
These tests will show not only whether the finished product is issue-free, but also whether it reflects the client’s original idea and meets their business goals.

Step #6: Software Deployment
Depending on the nature and the complexity of the software, it can either be deployed all at once or in several stages.

Step #7: Software Maintenance
Software is never really finished. This is why software maintenance is the final but also a continuous stage of software development.
During the maintenance stage, it is important to collect and analyze user feedback to identify bugs and issues that the quality assurance team might have missed.
In this stage, the software is perfected to outperform its competition and provide long-term value to the client.


4 Main Software Development Methodologies

Methodology #1: Waterfall

Waterfall is the oldest, most common software development methodology.
Under the Waterfall methodology, you will need to follow the process step-by-step, completing one before moving onto the next.
The Waterfall method does not give you a lot of flexibility

Methodology #2: Agile

Agile is essentially the opposite of Waterfall. As the name suggests, its main priorities are flexibility and a fast-paced workflow.
The Agile method is based around short bursts of the development process called Sprints.
Instead of spending a long time building a software product from start to finish, 
the development team will work to create a so-called Minimal Viable Product (MVP) and deliver it to the client stage by stage.
The Agile method is very fitting for projects that require continuous updates but can be very costly and difficult to manage.

Methodology #3: DevOps
DevOps is an extension of the Agile methodology that prioritizes continuous improvement and collaboration.

More of an organizational culture than a strict development methodology, DevOps relies on cross-organizational collaboration between different teams in the development pipeline.
In the more traditional methodologies, developers tend to use a single tool to complete a task before passing it onto the next person in the pipeline.
DevOps developers use the toolchains - sets of tools that enable them to continuously collaborate with other project stakeholders.
DevOps is a great methodology for projects that require continuous updates and need to be completed in the shortest time possible, but it can be problematic for more process-driven companies and projects.

Methodology #4: Rapid Application Development

The goal of Rapid Application Development is to maximize the quality of the end product while minimizing its cost.
Rapid Application Development tends to be client-centric and relies on user input in the development process.
It drops the strict process guidelines and procedures in favor of developing a functional prototype of the product as fast as possible and perfecting it until it’s ready for immediate deployment.
Rapid Application Development works best for smaller, time-sensitive projects and experienced teams, but will typically not be useful in other cases.

